meck and charming. The light in her eyes spoke forbearance and mercy, and the wrinkles in her checks, blessings and peace. Were it not that women are not to be compared to angels, I would say that she was just like one of God's own angels. Another thing about her was that she was spry as a youngster. The only sign of old age in her was the manner of her dress.
I did not know her before I left Jerusalem, but made her acquaintance after I returned. And how is it that I did not know her before? Well, tell me how it is that you don't know her even now. But it is ordained for every man whom he is to know, and when he is to get to know him, and how.
How did I get to know her? Once I went to visit one of the wise men of Jerusalem who lived near the Western Wall. I couldn't find his house, but I did find a woman coming along with a kerosene can full of water, and I asked her. Come along and I'll show you, said she to me. No need to bother, said I to her, just tell me where it is and I'll find the way.
At this she smiled and said, Why do you mind if it is given to an old woman like me to fulfill a commandment? If it's a commandment you're fulfilling, said I, then by all means enjoy the privilege; but give me this can you are holding.
Why, said she smiling, do you want to make the command-ment less? I certainly don't want to make the commandment any less, said I, but only to lessen your trouble. It isn't any trouble at all, said she, but a privilege, for the Blessed Holy One has given His creatures the strength to attend to their needs with their own hands.
We stepped around the stones in the roadway and wended our way from one alley to another, stepping aside for camels and donkeys and water-carriers and idlers and novelty seekers.
At length my companion stopped and said, Here's the house of the one you're looking for. Thank you, said I to her, Shalom.
And in I went.
I found the man at home, sitting at his desk. Whether he recognized me or not I don't know. But since he had hit upon something interesting and novel in connection with his studies just as I was coming in, he told me all about it. From that he went on to another interesting and novel item. On leaving I wanted to ask him, Who's that old woman who showed me the way? Her face was all peace, and the warmth in her voice gladdened the heart. But it's hardly possible to interrupt a sage when he's busy expounding all his scholarly novelle to you.
A few days later I went to town again to look for an old woman, a rabbi's widow, whose grandson I had promised, before returning to Jerusalem, that I would visit her.
It was the statt of the early rains. Rain was already falling and the sun was hidden in clouds. Outside Eretz Israel people regard such a day as belonging to spring. But in Jerusalem, which enjoys seven or eight months of sunshine, any day when the sun does not shine full force seems to be winter, from which folk seek cover in the houses and the courtyards and any place where there is a bit of roof.
I went strolling here and there, imbibing the scent of the rains musically falling and screening themselves in many-colored mists, and gathering between the stones in the street, and slapping against the walls of the houses, and dancing on the roofs, and dripping and dropping into puddles and pools
which were sometimes muddy and sometimes clear and gleam-ng in the beams of sun that came twinkling through at intervals between the clouds to see whether the water was casing off; for in Jerusalem the sun wants to do its duty even pn a rainy day.
I went between the vaulted shops among the goldsmiths, and from there passed to the street of scents and spices, and from there to the shoemakers and blanket weavers, and from there to the cooks and then to the Street of the lews. Swathed in their rags and tatters the beggars sat, not ready so much as to take their hands out of their wrappings, but glaring at every passer-by who did not put his own hand into his pocket. I had a pocket full of small coins with me, so I went from one beggar to another giving each of them his alms. When I was done I asked where the rebbetzin lived, and they showed me.
I entered one of those courtvards about which any one might well doubt whether a human being indeed lived there, and climbed up six or seven broken steps and reached a warped door. Outside it I stumbled over a cat; inside over a heap of rubbish. A frosty mist was in the air so that I could not see anybody, but I heard an annoyed voice croaking, Who's there? Raising my eyes I saw a kind of iron bed piled with cushions and pillows, and in the middle of the pile a startled and testy old woman.
I greeted her and told her that I had come from abroad with regards from her grandson. She brought her hand out from amid the pillows, pulled the quilt well up over her neck and asked how many houses he had, and whether he had a servant girl in his house, and if he had fine carpets in every room.
After a while she groaned and said, This cold will be the end of me. When I saw how badly the cold was affecting her, I said to myself that a kerosene stove would case her suffering.
Permitting myself to use a little subterfuge, I said, Your grandson gave me some money to buy you a stove, a portable stove. You fill it with kerosene and light the wick and it
burns and heats the place up. Here's the money, I added, taking out my purse.
How shall I go and buy a stove? she answered peevishly.
Have I got feet?-Lumps of ice, that's what I've got. Before ever this cold takes me to the grave it'll drive me out of my mind. And there outside Eretz Israel they say that Eretz Israel is a hot country. For the wicked in hell it's hot. Tomorrow, I told her, the sun will come out and drive away the cold.
Before the comfort will start, answered she, the soul will depart. In just an hour or two, I consoled her, I shall send you the stove. She withdrew back down among her pillows and. cushions and quilts as if to show her would-be benefactor that his favors were not to be relied on.
I took my leave, went to the Jaffa Road, entered a hardware store, bought the best portable stove available, and sent it to the old rebbetzin. A little later I went back to her, in case she did not know how to handle such stoves, so that I could show her how to light it. On my way it occurred to me that I was not likely to hear an outpouring of gratitude from her. Old women are not all alike. The one who had seen me to the home of that sage of mine was amiable while the one to whom I sent the oven was not cordial even to somebody who was concerned about her welfare.
And here I must insert a little preface. It is not my intention to show the praises of one by citing the demerits of the other, and certainly not to tell the tale of the whole city and its inhabitants. A man's eyeball is a small thing, and it cannot comprehend the city of the Blessed Holy One. Why, then, do I mention the incident with the rebbetzin? Because when I came back to her room I found the other old woman there.
I stepped aside to let her pass. She stopped and asked how I was, just as though I were a kinsman. I stood surprised.
Could she be one of the old women whom I had known in Jerusalem before going abroad? Why, most of those had perished of hunger during the Great War. And as for the few
remaining, well, I had changed quite a bit. I was a youngster when I left Jerusalem, and now the years I had spent away from Bretz Israel had made an old man of me, so how could she recognize me?
She saw that I was at a loss, smiled and said, You don't recognize me? Why you're the one who wanted to carry my kerosene can when you went to visit so-and-so. Why, said I, you are the one who showed me the way, and now here I am, standing bewildered as though I didn't know you.
She laughed and said, And do you have to recognize all the old women in Jerusalem?
But how did you recognize me? I wanted to know. Since the eyes of Jerusalem continually watch for all Israel, she explained, whoever comes here is engraved on our heart, and we do not forget him.
It is a cold day, said I to her, a day of wind and rain, and here I stand keeping you out in the open.
I have already seen greater cold than you will find in Jerusalem, said she in a friendly way, while as for the wind and the rain, we thank God for them when we pray,
"Who
causeth the wind to blow and the rain to fall." You have done a very good deed, bringing life to old bones. The stove you sent to the rebbetzin warms her very soul.
I bowed my head like one embarrassed at hearing himself praised. She sensed this and said, Commandments were not given for us to be ashamed of. Our fathers who fulfilled many commandments never spoke of them. But we, since we fulfill so few, it behooves us to celebrate cach commandment we do carry out, so that others may hear of it and learn from our deeds. Now, my son, go to the rebbetzin and see how warming the commandment is which you have fulfilled.
I went in to see the rebbetzin, and found her sitting by the lit stove with droplets of light spattering through the holes, and the room filled with warmth, and a wizened cat resting on her knces while she looked at the stove and spoke to the cat,
saying, It seems to me you're enjoying the warmth more than I.
I see, said I to her, that the stove is burning well and heating the place. Are you satisfied with it?
And if I am satisfied, answered the rebbetzin, will that make it smell less or be hotter? I used to have a stove in my home which was kept lit from the end of the Sukkot Festival until Passover eve; and it used to give heat like the sun at midsummer and it really made one happy and satisfied, not like these light stoves which only warm for a moment. One really can't ask the inventors to do a thorough job; it's enough if they pretend they're doing it. That's what I told my townsfolk * after the passing of my husband the rabbi, may he intercede on my behalf, when they brought a new rabbi to town. What do you want, said I, maybe you'd like him to be like your rabbi who passed away? It'll be quite enough for this fellow if he doesn't cause you trouble. And I said the like to my neighbors when they came to look at the stove that my grandson sent me through you. I told them, It's a stove fit for the age and an age fit for the stove. What did my grandson write to you? He didn't write anything? He doesn't write to me either. He must think that since he's sent me a puny little stove he's done all his duty toward me.
After taking my leave of the rebbetzin I told myself, I, too, think I've done my duty in sending her a puny little stove, and 1 don't need to visit her any more. But in the end I went back because of that charming old lady, since all the visits which I was destined to pay her had not yet been used up.
Once again I have to add that I have no intention of relating everything that happened to me in those days. A man has many affairs, and if we were to set out to tell them all, the mouth could never manage it. However, everything concerning that old woman is worth telling.
On the eve of the New Moon I went to the Western Wall. after the fashion of Jerusalem folk who go to pray beside the Western Wall every New Moon eve.
Winter had almost run out and the first signs of the spring
0
could be seen. The sky stood pure and clear, while earth had shed its gloom. The sun laughed in the heavens and the city was afloat in its light. Were it not for the troubles which beset us, we would have rejoiced. Oh, we were beset by ample and evil troubles. Literally before the first had ended its term the second was well on its wav. From the Jaffa Gate all the way to the Western Wall, men and women of all the communities of Jerusalem were moving along together with newcomers whom the All-and-Ever Present had brought to their own place yet who had not yet found their own proper place.
In the space before the Wall, inside the booth of the Mandatory Police, the policemen sat in order to see that nobody but themselves guarded the people praying. Our agitators saw this and were agitating. The worshipers bent themselves and pressed against the stones of the Wall. Some wept while some wondered: And Thou, O Lord, how long? We are already sunk to the lowest depth, yet Thou dost delay to redeem us.
I found myself a tiny place beside the Wall. Sometimes I stood among the worshipers and sometimes among the wonderers. I wondered about the nations of the world: Not enough that they are hounding us from all countries, but they have to go on hounding us even in our own home.
While I was standing there I was shoved away from my place by one of the Mandatory Police pushing with the riding crop in his hand. What could have upset him to make him so angry? An old woman had brought a little stool with her to sit on. The policeman came at a trot and kicked away the footstool, knocking the woman over. Then he took away the stool, because she had broken the law made by the Mandatory lawmakers, forbidding a worshiper to bring a seat to the Wall.
The people praying saw this and remained silent, for who can argue with someone mightier than he? Came the old woman whom I knew and looked at him. The policeman dropped his eyes and replaced the stool.
I approached the old lady and said to her, Your eyes are more powerful than all the promises of England, for England has given us the Balfour Declaration but sets her officials over us to nullify it, but you, my old one, just set your eyes upon that wicked one and put to nought all his evil purposes.
Don't speak so, answered she, he's a good Gentile who saw my anguish and gave the poor woman back her stool, Have you completed the Afternoon Prayers? I ask because if you can spare the time I'll fulfill the commandment of visiting the sick in your company. The rebbetzin, long life to her, has fallen ill. Now she is really sick. If you feel like it, come along* and I'll show you a short cut.
I joined her and we went together. We wound our way from alley to alley and from court to court, and at almost every step she paused to give a piece of sugar to a child or a coin to a beggar, or to ask a man how his wife was and a woman how her husband was. Since you are asking everybody how they are, said I to her, I'll ask you how you are.
Blessed be He and Blessed be His Name, she answered, I lack for nothing from Him. The Blessed Holy One gives all His creatures according to their needs, and I, too, am one of His creatures. I ought to give him particular thanks today because He has doubled my portion. Now what is that? I asked her.
Day by day, she replied, I complete one day's reading of the Psalms, but today I completed two days readings. But even as she spoke her face grew sad.
You are upset, said I to her. She paused a little while and then replied, Yes, my son, I was happy but am no longer.
Even as she spoke her face grew bright again, she raised her yes aloft and said, Bless God who has removed my grief from me. Why, said I, were you happy and then sad, and now you are happy again? If you won't be vexed, said she fondly, I'll tell you that you should not have asked the questions in such a way. You should have said, How have you merited it that God should take your grief away, since all things are
equal in the eyes of the Blessed Name--joy and grief alike?
Can I be vexed or annoyed, said I, when you teach me how a person ought to speak? Why, it's a full clear text, "Happy is the man who does not forget Thee."
You are a good man, said she, and have quoted me a good verse, so I too shall not withhold a good thing from you. You ask me why I was happy and why I was sad, and why I am happy once again. Certainly you know just as well as I do that all a man's deeds from his birth to his death are portioned out to him; and even the number of times that a man should recite Psalms. But the choice lies with him how many Psalms he should say each day. Some men are worthy of completing the entire Book of Psalms every day, while some merit the completion of one of the Five Books or the daily portion each day. I have made it my practice to recite a day's portion each day. Today I went on and completed two daily portions.
When I thought this over I felt sad, for maybe I am no longer necessary in the world and they want to be done with me and are urging me on to finish my share and complete my portion.
Yet it is good to give thanks to the Lord, and if I die I cannot say even a single Psalm, not so much as a single word. The Blessed Holy One saw my grief and showed me His wondrous loving-kindness, so that I should know that such is His Blessed Will. And if the Name wishes to slay me, who am I to grieve?
God took my sorrow away from me at once. Blessed be He and Blessed be His Name.
I glanced at her sidewise and wondered. Whence comes such humility and submission. I thought of the earlier generations, who had been full of good qualities. I spoke to her of past generations and told her, Even more than I have spoken of have you seen with your own eyes. When a person is granted length of days and years, she answered, he is privileged to see a great many things, both good things and even better ones.
Tell me some of those good things, I beseeched her. She thought a little while and said, How shall I begin? I shall begin
with my childhood. When I was a child I was a chatterbox.
From waking and right up to bedtime I simply never stopped chattering. But there was an old man living nearby who told those who were happy at my chatter, What a pity about this child who wastes all her words in infancy, for what will be left over for her old age? That frightened me, and I became afraid that I might be stricken dumb the next day. But after a while I understood what the old man meant: that a person should not use up in a little time what has been allotted to him for the whole of his life. I accustomed myself to weighing every word, to see whether it had to be said; and I made a practice of speaking little. Since I made a practice of speaking little, a whole hoard of things to say remained with me. My years have been prolonged until I finish saying all the words which have been allotted to me. And now I only have a tiny fistful of words you want me to expend them all at once! If I use them up I diminish my days.
certainly did not ask it for any such purpose, said I. Why, we are walking a long time together and have not yet reached the rebbetzin. You probably remember the courtyards through which we used to take short cuts, said the old woman. Now most of the city is inhabited by Moghrabis and we have to avoid them, and that makes us take a long way round.
We reached a certain courtyard. You see this courtyard? said she, forty Jewish families used to live in it, with two synagogues, and they used to pray and study day and night.
But then they let it go and the Arabs came and seized it.
We reached a coffechouse. You see this building? said she, it used to contain a big Yeshiva where Torah scholars sat studying; but they went away and Arabs came and seized it.
We reached a place where donkeys were lying on the ground.
You see this place? said she, there used to be a public kitchen here where poor folk of refinement used to come in hungry and go out full; but it was abandoned and the Arabs came and seized it. In these houses where Torah and prayer and charity
never ceased, Arabs and donkeys now make merry. Now, my son, we are reaching the courtyard of the rebbetzin. Go in, and I shall come in afterward. The poor thing is so full of the imaginary good things outside Eretz Istacl that she does not see the really good thing.
And what is the really good thing? I asked her. She smiled and said, Fancy you asking that, my son! Surely you have learned the passage,
"Happy art thou if thou art selected and
dost draw near; He will dwell in thy courts." And which are the courts of the Blessed Holy One? Why, the courts of our God in the midst of Jerusalem. It is the habit of people, when they mention Jerusalem, to add the phrase, the Holy City; but as for me, when I say Jerusalem I add nothing, for its sanctity is in its name, in the very name itself. Go on up, my son, go up and do not stumble on the steps. I have often told the warden of the Kolel that these steps ought to be repaired, and what does the warden always answer me?_-The courtyard is old and tumble-down anyway, and it is not worth while wasting anything on it at all. That's how the houses of Israel fall to rack and ruin until we let them go and the Ishmaclites come and take possession of them. Houses that were built with the tears of the fathers are forsaken by the children. But here I am, chattering all over again and hastening
my end.
"ยก went into the rebbetzin's room and found her lying in bed.
Her head was all tied up and there was a bandage round her throat, and she was coughing so heavily that even the medicine bottles beside her bed shook at the noise. Are you sick, rebbetzin? I asked her. She moaned from deep down and tears clouded her eyes. I wished to comfort her, but could not find the right words, so I looked down at the ground and said, Ill and alone. She groaned and said, I am ill, very ill indeed. There's no one in the whole world as ill as I. But alone I am not. Even here in Jerusalem, where they don't know me and don't know of the honor which surrounded
me in my own town, even here there's a woman who comes from time to time, fetching me a spoonful of soup and bringing me food to my bed. What do you hear from my grandson?
I'm sure he's angry at me because I never wrote him a letter thanking him for the stove. But now you tell me, can I go and buy ink and paper and write letters? I can barely bring a spoonful of food to my lips. I'm surprised that Tillie hasn't come yet.
If you are thinking of that charming old woman, said I, why, she told me that she'll be along soon. Whether she's charming, said the rebbetzin, I don't know, but she certainly is a doer of good deeds. Just see how many pious old women there are in Jerusalem, all buzzing prayers and entreaties like so many bees. Do you think a single one of them has come to ask me, Do you need anything at all, rebbetzin? Oh my head, my head, if the pains in my heart don't drive me from the world, then my aching head will.
I see it's hard for you to speak, said I. You say it's hard for me to speak, said she, but I can tell you I'm hard for me to bear, all of me. Even the cat feels it and keeps away from me.
And still people say that a cat sticks to its house. But I suppose my neighbors' mice are sweeter than all the delicacies I feed him. What did I want to say? I always forget what I want to say. Tillie isn't like that. Though she has bundles and bundles of years on her shoulders, all her senses still serve her. And she's twice as old as I am. If my father, of blessed and righteous memory, were alive he would seem just a baby compared with
her.
Who is this Tillie? Tasked her. Why, weren't you the one who just mentioned her? said the rebbetzin. Nowadays they don't know Tillie, but in the past everybody did because she was very rich and owned all kinds of enterprises. When she gave up her affairs and came to Jerusalem she brought several barrels full of gold with her. And if it wasn't barrels, then she certainly brought one box full of gold. My neighbor women
Il me their mothers told them that when Tillie came to crusalem all the important folk were after her, courting her, me for himself and another for his son. But she turned them | down and remained a widow, first a rich widow, then a well-to-do widow, and then just an old woman.
Anyone who sees Tillie, said I, would think that she never saw a bad day in her life. You say that she never saw a bad day in her life, the rebbetzin mocked me, but I tell you that she never saw a good one. I wouldn't wish even on my enemies the sufferings that Tillie has had. Do you suppose that because she doesn't need the favors of any Kole her life is a blessed one? Why, it's my opinion that even a door-to-door beggar wouldn't change his troubles for her. Oh my aches, my aches, I'm trying to stop thinking about them, but they won't stop thinking about me.
I saw that the rebbetzin knew more than she was telling, but since I knew she would not answer if I were to ask, I stood up to go. The chimney sweep isn't even inside the chimney, said she, and already he has a sooty face. You haven't so much as sat down properly yet, and you're already getting up to go.
What's the hurry? If you'd like me to stay, said I, I'll stay.
But she was silent and didn't answer a word.
I began to talk to her about Tillie and said, Can you tell me something about her? And if I do tell, she answered, will it make things easier for me or for her? I don't like all this tale telling. You take cobwebs and stick them together with other cobwebs and say, It's a magnificent palace. But one thing I shall tell you, the Blessed Holy One took pity on that saint, and so he put an evil spirit into that apostate, may her name be blotted out. What are you staring at me for? 'Don't you understand Yiddish?
Yiddish I understand, said I, but your speech, rebbetzin, I don't understand. Who's that saint, and who's that apostate whom you cursed? And maybe I ought to bless her, said the rebbetzin, maybe I ought to say, You've done well, apostate
that you are, exchanging the gold coin for a worn copper, turning your face on me again as though I were talking Turkish.
You've heard that my husband of blessed memory was a rabbi because they call me rebbetzin, but you haven't heard that my father was also a rabbi, a rabbi compared with whom all the other rabbis were fledglings. When I speak of rabbis I mean real rabbis, and not the kind we have here who put on the rabbinical robes and call themselves rabbis. Oh world, you world, false you are, and sham and false everything in you.
But my father of righteous and blessed memory was a real rabbi from his very childhood, so the matchmakers in the country were all eager to match him off. There was a certain rich widow. When I say rich, I mean she was really rich. She had an only daughter, and if only she hadn't had her! She took a barrel of gold coins and told them, those matchmakers, If you match him to my daughter, then he gets this barrel, and if it's not enough I'll add to it. The daughter was not worthy of that righteous saint, because he was a saint and she, may she be damned, was an apostate, just as her finish proved about her beginning, because she ran away and entered some nunnery and changed her religion. And when did she run away?-when they were leading her to the bridal canopy.
Her mother wasted half her wealth on her in order to get her out of there. She got as far as the Emperor, the wretched mother did, and even he couldn't help her at all, because anybody who once enters a nunnery never comes out of there any more. Do you know who that apostate is? The daughter of_-hush, she's coming.
Tillie came in with a pot of food in her hand. Seeing me she said, Are you here? Remain seated, my friend, remain seated. Visiting the sick is a great commandment. Rebbetzin, you are looking better all the time. The Name's Salvation is as the twinkling of an eye. The Blessed Name sends His healing more and more, every hour. I've brought you a spoonful of soup, just enough for you to swallow. Raise your
head, my dear, and I'll arrange the pillow. That's it, that's it, my dear. What a pity, my son, that you do not dwell in the city and don't see our rebbetzin, long life to her, getting better from hour to hour.
And don't I live in Jerusalem? said I to her. Isn't Nahlat Shiv'ah Jerusalem? Heaven forbid, said Tillie, who says not?
On the contrary, Jerusalem is destined in the future to expand on every side even as far as Damascus, vet the eve that has seen Jerusalem all established within the walls cannot accustom itself to viewing anything built beyond the walls of Jerusalem as though it were Jerusalem itself. The whole of Eretz Israel is holy, not to mention the surroundings of Jerusalem; and yet all within the walls is sanctified in even higher sanctity. I know, my son, I have not said anything you do not know better than I. Then why do I say all this? In order to recount the praises of Jerusalem.
I saw from the rebbetzin's eves that she was hurt because Tillie was speaking to me and not to her. So I took my leave and went away.
Various affairs kept me occupied, and I did not come to the Old City. Afterward came the matter of the tourists. Now you know the tourists, and how they used to laugh at us and the country. But when the All-and-Ever Present made things a little roomier for us in the country, they also began coming to take a look. And when they come they regard us as though we were created only to serve them. Still, there's one good thing about tourists, that because we show them things we also get to see the things. Once and again when I went to the Old City with them in order to show them the Western Wall I met Tillie. Unless I'm mistaken something had happened to her, because she always used to go out without a cane but this time she supported herself with one. Because of the tourists I did not tarry with her. After all, they had come to see the country and not for the sake of an old woman who was not included in their plans and itinerary.
When the tourists left Jerusalem I felt like a person who doesn't know what to do. I tried to go back to my work but couldn't. So I got up and went to the Old City, and made the rounds of all the places I had shown to the tourists. What I saw? What didn't I see! He Who by His goodness renews the work of Creation every day makes His city anew every hour.
New buildings are not built, new plants are not planted, yet Jerusalem herself keeps on becoming new. Whenever I enter the City she seems new to me. I do not know in what this novelty consists. Let the great clarifiers come and clarify it
for us.
The learned sage I have already mentioned came across me and dragged me off to his home, and expounded to me all the novelle he had turned up since last he had seen me. We sat as long as we sat, and I asked the questions and he answered;
I raised difficulties and he explained them away; I was thick-headed and he made matters clear.
How good and pleasant it is to sit before a sage of the Sages of Jerusalem and learn Torah from him! His home is simple and his furniture is simple, but his wisdom goes on expanding, like those colors one sees from the window over the mountains of Jerusalem. They are desolate, those mountains of Jerusalem, without palaces and castles upon them. Ever since we were exiled from our land the nations have been coming one after the other, destroying and ruining again and again.
Yet the mountains rise in all their majesty, fitted out with embroideries of all colors and glorified with countless orna-mentations; among them the Mount of Olives, with no forest full of trees, but shrouded with the graves of the righteous, who were completely given over to the land, in life and in death. As I was about to leave, the mistress of the house came and told her husband, You have forgotten what you promised Tillie. Most remarkable, he nodded. From the time I know Tehilla she has never asked anything of me and I have never heard that she asked anything of anybody; but
now she has asked me to tell you that she would like to see
vou.
Do you refer, I asked, to the old lady who saw me to your home? If I am not mistaken you do not call her by the name which is generally used. Tehilla, he replied, is the holy Hebrew hame of Tillie. From this case you may infer that already four for five generations ago our forefathers were giving their daughters names which sound as though they were just invented today. Similarly with the name of my wife Tehiya, which you will doubtless suppose was invented by the generation of the Revival, which is the meaning of tehiya. Yet the truth is that it comes from the sage, the Hiddushei Harim, who instructed the father of my wife's grandfather to call his daughter Tehiya; and my wife is named after her.
Four or five generations ago you said, said I to him, but is the old woman really as old as all that? He smiled and answered, Her years are not engraved on her face, and it is not her habit to say how old she is, and if she hadn't let it slip we would not have known. But once Tehilla came to congratulate us on the wedding of our son, and she blessed him and his wife and hoped they might live to her age. What kind of blessing is this, said my son to her, that you have blessed us with? And then she said to him, I am ninety and eleven years old; and that happened three years ago. So it follows that she is now ninety and fourteen, which means a hundred and four.
Since you have mentioned her, said I, tell me who she is.
What there is to tell you about her, he responded, is that she is a saint, a saint plain and simple. And if you have a chance to go see her, do so. But I doubt whether you'll find her at her home. Either she is visiting the sick or looking after the incurables, or else she has gone to attend to some other commandment which people do not bother about. Yet maybe you will find her at home, because she goes there between performing one good deed and the next, and sits darning socks and mending clothes for poor orphans. When she was rich
she did good with her money, and now that nothing is left except the bare remnants for her meager upkeep, she does good with her own person.
The sage brought me to Tehilla's door. On the way he resumed expounding his novelle to me. Sceing that I was not listening, he smiled and said, From the moment I mentioned Tchilla you have forgotten everything else. If you would care to, said I, tell me something about her. What she is now, he answered, I have told you. What she was outside Eretz Israel I do not know apart from what everybody does: that she was very rich indeed and conducted big affairs, but finally her sons died and her husband died and she went and abandoned all her affairs and came up to Jerusalem. My mother, may she rest in peace, used to say, When I see Tehilla I see that there are things even worse than widowhood and loss of children.
But mother never told me what these things were, so I do not know and now we never shall know; for all those who knew Tehilla abroad are already dead, and Tehilla never has much to say. And even now when she has changed a bit and speaks more than she used to, she doesn't talk about herself. But here we are at her house. I doubt whether you'll find her in, because when evening comes she goes round to the classes to give the little children sweets.
Within a few moments I found myself in Tehilla's home, where she was sitting at a table and seemed to be waiting for me. Her room was small, with thick walls and a vaulted ceiling, like the Jerusalem rooms of old. Were it not for a little bed in the corner of the room and an earthenware jar on the table, I would have taken it for a prayer room. The few things in it-the lamp of gleaming copper and the copper dipper and the other branched copper lamp hanging down from the ceiling, as well as the table on which lay a praver book, a Pentateuch and some other book--all helped to give the room something of the charm of a praver room.
I bent my head and said, Blessed be she who is here. She
replied, Blessed is he who comes. Why, you live like a princess, I told her. All daughters of Israel are princesses, said she, and I, praise the living God, am a daughter of Israel. You nave done well to come. I wished to see you, and not only to see you but to talk to you. Are you perchance ready to do The a favor? Unto half the kingdom, said I. It is good that you have mentioned kingdom, said she, for all Israel are princes and their deeds are royal deeds. And when a man of Israel does his fellow a favor he is performing a royal deed.
Sit down my son, sit down. Sitting is good for speech. I don't wish to waste your time. You must surely be a busy man and you need your time to make a living. Times have changed since we had plenty of time and to spare, and were happy to spend a while talking. Now everybody's in a hurry, everybody dashes and runs. They're accustoming themselves to run so that if they merit it, they will run to meet Messiah.
You can see, my son, how I have become a chatterbox. I am forgetting the advice of the old man who warned me not to speak more than was necessary.
I sat down facing Tehilla and waited to hear why she had invited me. But now that she had remembered the old man's advice, she had nothing to say. At last she looked at me, turned her eyes away and looked at me again like a man looking at his messenger, to see whether he is worthy of the mission. At length she began, and told me of the passing of the rebbetzin, who had died overnight, while her stove burned and her cat warmed himself beside it until the bier-bearers had taken her out and whoever it was had come and taken himself the stove. You see, my son, said Tehilla, a man performs a commandment, and the commandment performs a commandment. You fulfilled a commandment for that poor woman and the commandment itself performed a commandment for another person who also wishes to warm his bones.
She looked at me again and said, You must surely be surprised that I put you to the trouble of coming here. On the
contrary, said I, I am very pleased. If you are pleased, she answered, then I am too. I am pleased at finding somebody who is prepared to do me a favor. But why should you be pleased? She paused a little while and went on, I have heard that you are a man of the pen, that you are a modern-day scribe. Maybe you can loan me your pen for a little letter, For many years I have wished to write one single letter. If you are really ready to, then write me the letter.
I took out a fountain pen. She looked at it and said, You carry the pen about with you like someone carrying a spoon about so that when something to eat comes his way the spoon is ready and waiting. And the food, said I, is inside the spoon; and I explained how the pen worked. She took it in her hand and said, You say there is ink in it but I can't see a drop. I explained it to her again. In that case, said she, there is nothing to the charge they make against this generation that all the innovations they have produced are only harmful. Why, they have invented a portable oven and such a pen as this too, and maybe they have invented other things for the people's benefit. The more you live the more you see. In any case, take this quill which I myself have prepared, and dip it in this ink. I don't doubt your pen, but I want my letter to be written by my own. Here is a shect of paper, first-grade paper which I have kept from bygone days, from the times when they used to make good paper. I have had it with me for more than seventy years, and it's still as good as new. One thing more I ask of you, write in the square letters of the prayer book, or in the Torah script. You can rely on a scribe that if he has not yet been privileged to write a Torah scroll, he has certainly written a scroll of Esther.
When I was a boy, I reassured her, I wrote myself an Esther Scroll in accordance with all the proper rules. And whether you believe me or not, everybody who saw the scroll praised it.
Although I never saw it, said Tehilla, I assumed that you
kmow how to write in a good straight script. I'll go and brew you a glass of hyssop, and meanwhile you write. Don't bother, I told her, I have just drunk. Then what can I honor ou with? she asked. I'll give you a piece of sugar and you'll ay the blessing and I'll respond, Amen.
She produced a piece of sugar and gave it to me. Then she paused a little while and said, Now take the quill and dip it in ink and write. I shall tell you in Yiddish and you will write it in the Holy Tongue. I have heard that they teach the girls how to speak and write in the Holy Tongue. So you see, my son, the Blessed Holy One in His loving-kindness conducts His world better in each succeeding generation. When I was a girl they did not do that. But anyway I understand the prayers in the prayer book and the Portion of the Week in the Pentateuch and the different Psalms and the Ethics of the Fathers. O dear, my son, today I have not said the daily portion!
I knew that she was referring to her daily portion of Psalms and told her, Here you go saying, Oh dear, when you ought to be happy. To be happy? she asked. You have been delayed from Heaven, I explained, in order that an additional day should be added to you. She sighed and said, If I knew that Messiah were coming tomorrow I would be happy to dwell a day longer in this world, but when I add to my own days but our righteous Messiah tarries and does not come, what is my life and what of all my joy? Heaven forbid that I should complain about my years. If it pleases the Blessed Holy One to keep me in life, then it pleases me too. But I keep asking myself, How long will this bundle of bones go on dragging itself about in this world. Far younger women than I have merited to come to their rest in the Mount of Olives, while I wear down my legs until they wear themselves away. And wouldn't it be better to come to the World on High with sound limbs and members, and to return the pledge whole?
I don't say that we have to increase flesh, which is bothersome
to the bier-bearers, but certainly whole limbs well become the dead. Here I go multiplying words again! But it makes no difference any longer, a word more or a word less. I am already prepared to hand back the pledge to its Owner. Take the quill, my son, and write.
I dipped the quill in ink and prepared the paper, and waited for Tehilla to tell me what I should write. She was busy with her thoughts and was not aware of me. I sat looking at her, my eyes taking in every wrinkle and furrow in her face. How many vicissitudes she must have gone through! She was wont to say that she had seen good things and better yet. From what I had heard, the things were not so good. It was about her that a wise man had once said, The righteous mourn in their heart but joy is on their face.
She noticed me, turned her head toward me and said, Have you begun?
You have not told me yet what I should write, I reminded her. The start, said she, you know for yourself. One begins with the praises of the All-and-Ever-Present, by writing, "With the aid of the Blessed Name."
I smoothed the paper, shook the quill and wrote "With the aid of the Blessed Name.
She sat up, looked at the script and said, Nice, very nice, and now what you should write? Write, "Here in the Holy City of Jerusalem, may she be builded and established speedily and in our days, Amen." When I talk I say Jerusalem without adding anything, but in a letter we have to mention the sanctity of Jerusalem and add an entreaty for its rebuilding in order that the reader should take Jerusalem into his heart and know that she requires mercy, and pray for her. Now, my son, write the day and the Portion of the Week and the year.
After I had written the date she added, Now, my son, lift up your hand and write a tall letter Lamed. Have you written it? Show me what it looks like. I can't say that it isn't well done, but just the same it would have been better to make the
top a bit higher. Now, my son, put a letter Khaph next to it, and after the Khaph a Beth and after the Beth a Vav, a Vav, Var I said, and now comes a Daled. Show me how the word KHVOD comes out. Very nice indeed. *To the honorable ." The one to whom this letter is being written is worthy of some fine honor. Now write, "The rabbinically famed." What, have you already written it? Your hand goes faster than my thoughts. Before I gather my thoughts together you already have them down in writing. Your father, may God brighten his Eden, did not waste the tuition money he spent on you. Forgive me, my son, I am tired. Let us put off writing the letter for another day. When will you be able to come?
Tomorrow? I asked her. Tomorrow? she answered, You want to come tomorrow? What day is tomorrow? The eve of the New Moon. The eve of the New Moon is a fitting occasion for the matter in hand. Well, then, if it is to be to-morrow, let it be tomorrow.
I saw that she had become sad, and thought to myself, The eve of the New Moon, a day when people engage in much prayer and entreaty, is the day when they go to Mother Rachel's Tomb, so she will almost certainly have no time for her letter. If you have no time tomorrow, I told her, I shall come some other day. But why not tomorrow? she asked.
Indeed, I reminded her, tomorrow is the eve of the New Moon.
My son, she answered, you have reminded me of my distress.
It is the eve of the New Moon and I cannot go to Mother Rachel. Why not? Why not, because my legs will not carry me. But there are carriages, said I, and there are motorbusses.
When I came to Jerusalem, answered Tehilla, there were no motorbusses as yet, and not even any carriages, and we used to go on foot, and since I have always been accustomed to going on foot it is not fitting for me to change my practice.
What did you say, that you intended to come tomorrow? If the Name wishes to grant my desire, He will extend my breath for vet one dav more.
So I took my leave and went away and came back in the morning. I do not know whether I ought to have been in such a hurry to come. It may be that if I had deferred the matter she might have lived longer.
When I entered I saw a change in her. Her face had always been bright, but this day it was twice as bright as usual. And as her face was bright, so was her room. The stones of the floor were polished, as were the houschold utensils. And a white sheet was spread on the little bed, and the lower parts of the walls had been painted with blue lime. On the table stood a jar covered with parchment, and some sealing wax and a candle beside it. When had she limed the walls or when had she scoured the floor or polished her utensils? Unless angels had done the work for her, she must have been busy all night
long.
She raised herself with difficulty and whispered, It was good of you to come. I thought you might have forgotten and I wanted to go attend to my affairs. If you have to go, said I, then do, and I will come back later. She said, I have to confirm the contract, but since you have come, be seated and we will write, and I will attend to the contract afterward.
She rose and placed the letter before me, and fetched the ink and the quill. I took the quill, dipped it in the ink and waited for her to tell me what to write.
Are you ready? said she. Iam ready, too.
And as she said "I am ready, too' her face lit up with beatitude and a sweet smile adorned her lips. Once again I dipped the quill and looked at her. She noticed and said, Where did we stop? We stopped at the honored and outstanding Rabbi and so on. Now write his name.
Once more I dipped the quill and waited for her to tell me the
name.
She whispered, His name is Shraga. Have you written it? wrote it. She screwed up her eyes as though she were falling asleep. Then she stood up from her chair, looked at what I
had written and whispered again, Shraga is his name, Shraga.
And she sat down again and remained silent.
At length she stirred and said, I shall tell you more or less what you should write. She paused again quite a while, Screwed up her eyes and said, I see that I have to tell the whole story first, because then you will understand what happened and will know what to write. It's an old story, something that happened many years ago, three and ninety years ago.
She took her cane and rested her head on it. Then she raised her head and gazed for a while as though in wonder, like somebody thinking that he sits alone and then finding a stranger with him. All her tranquillity vanished while her face assumed a look of grief and anger. She groped with her cane then put it down and picked it up again and leaned on it, and passed her hand over her forehead until the wrinkles smoothed out. Then she said again, By telling you the whole story I'll make it easier for vou to write. His name you've already written. Shraga is his name. Now I'll tell you the whole thing from the beginning.
She raised her eyes and looked this way and that. When she saw that no one else was listening she began and said, I was about eleven years old at the time. And I know how old I was because father, of blessed memory, had the practice of recording in his Bible the birth of each of his children, even of the daughters. Take this volume of the Five Books and see.
When I came up to Jerusalem my brothers, may they rest in peace, gave up their claim to father's Bible and gave me the Five Books. What was I saying?-It was all so long ago. It was ninety-three years ago. But I remember it well. I'll tell and you'll understand one thing from another. If you are listening I'll tell you. I nodded and said, Tell me.
Once again she said, Well, so I was about eleven years old.
One night after the evening prayers father, may he rest in peace, came from the synagogue and with him several of our kinsfolk and friends, among them Petahia Mordecai, Shraga's
father. When they came in, mother, may she rest in peace, called me and told me to wash my face and put on a Sabbath dress; and she, too, put on a Sabbath dress and tied a silk kerchief round her head and took me by the hand, and together with me entered the big room where father was with his guests. Shraga's father looked at me and said, Not an ugly child. Father stroked my cheek and said to me, Tehilla, do you know who just talked to you, the father of your bridegroom talked to you. Mazal To and good luck to you daughter, tonight you have been betrothed and now you are a bride-to-be. All the guests at once congratulated me, wishing me Mazal Tow and calling me bride. Mother caught hold of me and took me back to her room for fear of the Evil Eye, and kissed me and said, From now on you are betrothed to Shraga, and, God willing, in a year's time, when the bridegroom reaches the age for putting on phylacteries, we shall put up the canopy for you both.
I knew Shraga. We used to play at nuts and at hide-and-seek together, until he grew bigger and began to study Talmud.
Once we were betrothed I used to see him every Sabbath, when he came to visit father and review for him all he had learned during the week; and mother gave me goodies and I would bring them to him, while father stroked my check and treated my bridegroom very cordially.
Mcanwhile they began to make preparations for the wedding.
Shraga's father had phylacteries written for him, and my father bought him a prayer shawl, and I sewed him a sack for the phylacteries and another for the Sabbath prayer shawl. Who it was that made him the bag to carry the weekday prayer shawl and the phylacteries I don't remember.
One Sabbath, about four weeks before the day they had set for the wedding, Shraga did not come to father. At the Afternoon Prayers father asked about him in the synagogue, and heard that he had gone on a journey. And where had he gone? To the rabbi of their group of Hassidim, because his
father had taken him there to be blessed for his first donning of the prayer shawl and phylacteries. Father nearly swooned at hearing the report; he had not known that Shraga's father was a member of the sect, for he had hidden the fact that he was a Hassid, as in those days the Hassidim were still despised and persecuted, and father was chief among the persecutors, and regarded the Hassidim as though they had forsaken the Community of Israel, God forbid.
At the close of the Sabbath, immediately after the Havdala ceremony, father tore up the betrothal agreement, and sent the torn parts over to the home of Shraga's father. On Tuesday he returned with Shraga, and they came to see father. Father sent them rudely away. Shraga leaped up and swore that he would never forgive us the insult. And father never bothered to ask Shraga's forgiveness, although he knew that if you annul a match you have to ask forgiveness of the humiliated party. And when mother would plead with father to ask Shraga's pardon, father mocked her and said, Have no fear, he's one of the sect. So contemptible were the Hassidim in father's eyes that he did not bother to do that which everybody is strict about.
All the wedding preparations had been made. The sacks of four and barrels of honey filled the house, and the kneading women and baking women had already been engaged to prepare the white loaves and the cakes. In brief, everything had been prepared for the nuptials. Nothing was lacking except a bridegroom. Father sent for a matchmaker and they found me another bridegroom, with whom I went under the bridal canopy.
What happened to Shraga I don't know, for father ordered the household never to mention Shraga's name. One day I heard that he and all his father's family had moved to a different town because they feared for their lives, since from the time father annulled the match they were never called up to the Torah reading, not even at the Simhat Torah celebration;
and they were unable to organize their own prayer service, since father, as head of the community, did not permit a minyan to be arranged outside the regular houses of prayer; and if they had not gone to another town where they were called up to the Torah, they would never have lived out their
year.
Three years after my marriage I had a son, and another one two years later; and two years after that I had a daughter.
The years ran their course and we made a good living. The children grew up and did well, and I and my husband, may he rest in peace, saw and rejoiced. I forgot Shraga and forgot that I had never received a writ of forgiveness from him.
Father and mother passed on to the next world. Before he passed on, father, of blessed memory, willed his affairs to his sons and son-in-law and enjoined them always to act together as one. Business was good and we conducted our household decently. We took good teachers for our sons and a Gentile governess for our daughter, for in those days God-fearing people kept the Jewish teachers- except those who taught Hebrew--at their distance, because they were held to be atheists. My husband used to bring Hebrew teachers from other places, since the local Hebrew teachers were compelled to accept every pupil even if he was not suitable, which was not the case with a Hebrew teacher brought from another town, who depended only on the good opinion of the person who hired him and was not required to accept any and every pupil.
Since they were alone in the world, they used to eat at our table on the Sabbath. My husband, too occupied with business to study Torah regularly, enjoyed having such guests who spoke to him of Torah. And the children and I enjoyed the beautiful tunes which one of them used to sing at table. We did not know that he was a Hassid and his doctrines were Hassidic and his tunes were Hassidic tunes, since in all other matters he behaved like all the good and law-abiding Jews.
But one Sabbath eve this teacher spoke of Torah. Afterward he closed his eyes and sang a sweet and very pleasing tune, so that our very souls melted because of the sweetness. My husband asked the Hebrew teacher, Where does one acquire uch devoutness? If your honor goes, whispered he, to our abbi, long life to him, you'll receive twofold and twice that.
Some days later my husband happened to be in the town of this teacher's rabbi, and he brought back new ways whose like I had not seen at father's; and I knew they were the ways of the Hassidim. And I thought in my heart, Father, who will remove the dust from your eyes, since you sent Shraga away because he was a Hassid, and now the bridegroom you gave me instead of him is doing the same as Shraga. If not as atonement for a transgression did it happen, I do not know why it happened.
My brothers and brothers-in-law saw and said nothing, for times had changed and nobody was ashamed of relations who were Hassidim. For meanwhile rich sons-in-law from other towns had come who followed Hassidic practices and had even established a Hassidic prayer house and made the journey to their rabbis quite openly. My husband did not go to pray regularly at the Hassidic house, but he practiced Hassidism and brought up the boys to be Hassidim; and from time to time he made the journey to his rabbi.
A year before our oldest son became Bar Mitzvah the plague came and many fell sick with it, the Merciful One deliver us.
There was not a house without someone ill. The illness struck us and our oldest son became sick. At last the Blessed Name had mercy on him, but not for long. After he recovered from his illness he began to study the laws of phylacteries in the big edition of the Shulhan Arukh. And I saw this and was happy that his Hassidism had not impaired his scholarship.
One day our son got up early in the morning and went to the Study House. There he found a man dressed in shrouds
like a corpse. That corpse was not a corpse but, the Merciful One deliver us, a madman who used to do crazy things. The child was terrified and fainted. With difficulty they brought him back to life. To life, but not to long life. After that he went on flickering like a memorial candle during the closing prayer on Yom Kippur. And before he ever had a chance to put on his phylacteries he gave up his soul and died.
During the seven days of mourning I sat thinking to myself, My son died at the close of the Sabbath, after the Havdala ceremony, thirty days before his time for putting on phylac-teries, and it was at the close of the Sabbath after the Havdala ceremony thirty days before I was to go under the bridal canopy with Shraga that father tore up the betrothal agree-ment. I reckoned out the times, and was shaken that these two evil events had happened on the same day and at the same hour. And even if this were nothing but chance, it was something that had to be thought over.
Two years later his brother reached the time to become Bar Mitzvah. He reached it but never arrived. It happened that he went to the wood of our town with his friends, in order to bring back branches for the Shavuot Festival. While they were in the wood he left them and went to the scribe to see his phylacteries which were being prepared; and he never came back. We thought that gypsies must have kidnaped him, since a band of gypsies was seen passing through town. A few days later his body was found in the big swamp near the wood, and we knew that the child had lost his way and fallen into the swamp.
When we rose from our mourning I said to my husband What is left to us but a little girl? If we do not beg Shraga's forgiveness she will end like her brothers.
During all these years we had heard nothing about Shraga.
For once he and all his father's household had left our town they had been forgotten, and we did not know where they were. Shraga, said my husband, was a Hassid, a follower of
Rabbi So-and-so. I'll make the journey to him and find out where Shraga is.
My husband was not one of the Hassidim of that rabbi. On the contrary, he was opposed to him on account of a dispute between the Hassidic rabbis; all because of a slaughterer whom one of them had appointed while the other had had him dismissed. In the course of that dispute a Jew was killed and several families were uprooted and several householders lost their property and several of them lived out their days in prison.
So my husband made the journey to the rabbi. Before he reached his town the rabbi had died, and his sons shared out his following and authority among themselves and each one went to a different town. My husband went from one son to another to ask about Shraga, yet they did not know. At last they told him, If it's Shraga you're asking about, Shraga has been spoiled and become a Misnaged. But where he was they did not know.
When a man is a Hassid you can find him.. If he is not a follower of one rabbi, then he is a follower of another. But as for an ordinary Jew, if you don't know where he is, how are you going to find him? My husband, may he rest in peace, was used to traveling, and his business affairs took him to a large number of places. Now whenever he journeyed he asked about Shraga. What with all his journeys my husband grew weak and began to cough blood. Once, while on a trip somewhere, he became ill and died.
After I had put up a tombstone over his grave I returned to my town and went into business. While my husband lived I had already been helping him in his affairs, and now he was dead I threw myself entirely into business. The Blessed Name redoubled my strength, so that folks said, She has the energy of a man. It might have been better if I had been granted wisdom instead of strength and energy, but the Lord is a knowing God Who does not require the opinions of His creatures as to what
is good. I thought to myself, All my toil I am toiling for my daughter, so the more wealth I acquire the more I shall benefit her. The affairs increased so that I had no time for my home apart from Sabbaths and Festivals, and even then half the day was spent in synagogue and half in receiving guests. To all appearances my daughter did not need me, since I had taken teachers for her and she was busy with her studies and I received many praises about her. And even the Gentiles who mock at us for speaking an outlandish tongue used to praise my daughter, and said that she spoke their tongue with the best of them.
And above all, the Gentile teachers made much of her and invited her to their homes. I called the matchmakers and they found me a bridegroom renowned for his knowledge of Torah and an ordained rabbi.
But I never had the privilege of leading them to the canopy, for an evil spirit entered into my daughter and she became crazy.
And now this is what I ask of you, my son, Write to Shraga that I have forgiven him for all the troubles which have come upon me on his account; and write to him that he too has to forgive me, since I have already been stricken enough.
I sat silent, saying never a word. Then I put a finger to my eyes and wiped away my tears. Then I said to Tehilla, Please tell me, since the day when your father tore up the betrothal agreement more than ninety years have gone by. Do you suppose that Shraga is still alive? And if he is alive, has the place where he is been revealed to you?
Shraga is no longer alive, said Tehilla. Shraga is dead. He passed thirty years ago. And how do I know the year of his passing? Well, that year on the seventh day of Adar I went to say the Afternoon Prayers. After they had read the passage from the Prophets, during the memorial prayer for the dead, I heard Shraga's name. After the prayer I asked the sexton, Who is this Shraga whom you mention? He said, So-and-so son of so-and-so, his kinsman, instructed me to cause his name
to be remembered. I went to so-and-so and heard what I heard.
If Shraga is dead, said I to Tehilla, how do you wish to send him a letter? You must be thinking, she answered, that the old woman has turned senile, counting as she does on post offices to deliver the letter to a dead man.
Then what will you do? I asked.
She rose and took the jar on the table and raised it aloft and said in a kind of chant, I shall take the letter and place it in the jar, and take the sealing wax and seal the jar over, and take the jar and its letter together with me.
And if you do take the jar and the letter, I thought to myself, I still do not see how the letter is going to reach Shraga. I looked at her and asked, Where will you take it, where will you take the jar with the letter? Tehilla laughed sweetly and said in a sing-song. Where shall I take the jar? I shall take it to my grave, to my grave I shall take the jar with the letter. There in the World on High they know Shraga and they know where he is. And faithful are the messengers of the Blessed Holy One, who will deliver my letter into his hands.
Once again Tehilla laughed her sweet laugh, the triumphant laugh of a child who has outwitted her elders. Then she rested her head on her cane and seemed to be sleeping. After that she raised her head and looked right at me and said, Now that the whole matter is clear to you, you can write yourself. And as she spoke she rested her head once again on her cane.
I took the quill and wrote. After I had finished the letter Tehilla raised her head and asked, Have you ended already?
I stood up and read it to her, while she sat with closed eyes as though she had dismissed the matter from her mind and did not wish to hear it. After I finished reading she opened her eyes and said, Good, my son, good. You have expressed my thought. The matter might have been written in a different way, but even thus, as you have written it, the things are sufficiently clear. Now, my son, give me the quill and I shall
sign my name to the letter and put the letter in the jar. Afterward I go to confirm the contract.
I dipped the quill in ink and handed it over to her. She took it and signed her name. Then she ran the quill over several letters in order that they might be more clear. After that she folded the letter and placed it inside the jar and wrapped a piece of parchment round the mouth. Then she lit a candle and took the sealing wax and held it over the flame until it was soft, and after that she sealed the jar all round. Then she rose and went to her bed. There she raised the cover and placed the jar under the pillow. Then she looked at me with gentle eyes and said softly, I shall hurry over to confirm the contract.
Bless you, my son, for going to this trouble on my behalf.
From now on I shall not bother you any more.
As she spoke she straightened the bedcover, took her scarf, went to the door, straightened herself, set her lips to the mezuza on the doorpost and waited for me until I went out.
She followed, locked the door and walked off briskly. I went after her.
As she walked she looked with gentle eyes at every spot we passed, and at each person who passed us. Suddenly she stopped and said, Tell me, my son, how can one leave such holy places and such fit and worthy Jews as these? I did not yet know where all this was leading.
When we reached the parting of the ways she halted and bid me farewell. I shall go with you, said I. We took another few steps onward, and then she stopped again, saying, I have already reached my place. Farewell. But seeing that I was determined to go with her she said nothing more. She went up the broad steps leading to the courtyard of the Burial Society offices and entered. I followed.
We entered the Burial Society building. Two clerks sat there, their ledgers before them and their pens in their hands, sitting and writing while blowing at little cups of black coffee.
When they saw Tehilla they put down their pens and rose out
of respect saying, Blessed be she who comes; and they quickly placed a chair for her. What brings you here? asked the older one. To fulfill the contract, she answered. You have come to fulfill the contract, said he, and we think that the time has come to cancel it. What are you saying? exclaimed Tehilla startled.
Why, said he, surely you have already withdrawn from the Society of Diers. Smiling at his joke he turned to me and said, Tehilla, may her days and years be lengthened, has the practice of coming year by year to confirm the bill of sale for her place on the Mount of Olives. So it was last year and so two years ago and three years ago and ten and twenty and thirty years ago, and so will she keep on doing until the Redeemer comes.
The Redeemer will come, said Tehilla, he will come indeed, and may he come speedily. But I shall not bother you any more. Can you possibly be going to a kvutza, asked the clerk wonderingly, like those young girls whom they call halutzot.
I am not going to any kvutza, said Tehilla. I am going to my own place.
Are you going back abroad? asked the clerk. From this land I am not going back, said Tehilla, I am returning to the place from which I come; as it is written, "And unto the dust thou shalt return."
Na, na, said the clerk, whistling through his lips. Do you really suppose that the Holy Burial Society hasn't anything to do? Take my advice and wait another twenty or thirty years. What's all this hurry? She whispered, I have already ordered the purifiers and washers to come, and it would be unbecoming to play with those good women.
The clerk's face fell and sadness was written all over him.
Then he said, How good it is for us to see you with us here, for as long as we see you we have an example of long life; but now that you wish to leave us, God forbid, it is as though you deprive us of the example.
If I still have years to live, said Tehilla, I gladly give them to you and to all who wish for life. Here is the contract. Sign it.
After the clerk had signed the bill of sale, Tehilla took it and placed it in her dress and said, Henceforward I shall not trouble you any more. May the Name be with you, dear Jews. Now I go to my own place.
She rose, went to the door, raised her mouth to the mezuza on the doorpost, kissed it and went out.
Seeing that I was accompanying her she stood still and said, Go back to your affairs, my son.
When you told me, said I, that you were going to confirm your contract I thought that you were referring to the contract for your home.
And as it turns out--she interrupted me and said--and as it turns out I have gone to confirm the contract for my eternal home. May I not need to dwell there long before I rise with all the dead of Israel. Fare you well, my son. I must hurry to my home. The cleansers and purifiers are surely waiting for me already. I stood dumbfounded and silent and she went on and vanished among the houses and the alleys.
Next morning I went to the Old City to see how Tehilla was. I met the sage whose home Tehilla had pointed out to me. He stood and drew me into a long talk. When I parted from him he wished to accompany me. I am not going home, I told him, I am going to Tehilla. May you go after a hundred and twenty years time, said he. Seeing my astonishment he added, May you go on living, the saint has forsaken us.
I took my leave and went my way, thinking all the while, Tehilla has passed away and gone, passed and gone her way.
In due course I found myself at Tehilla's home. I opened the door of her room and entered.
The tranquil silence of her room was like that in a prayer room after prayer. On the floor gathered the last of the water with which they had purified Tchilla.
